RFC: Compile time execution (#21)
vlang/rfcs: comptime.md

```v
gen.eval.add_func('include', fn (gen cgen.Gen, args []Value) {
    gen.includes.write_string(args[0].str())
})

// used like this in toplevel:
$include("header.h")
```

# Drawbacks 
This would break a lot of code that depends on current implementation of compile-time and it would take quite a lot of time to switch to new comptime and implement it. 

# Rationale and alternatives 

This design allows to execute entire V language at comptime and it makes it possible to:
- Implement serializers/deserializers
- Write code that would produce new code a-la Lisp macros 
- Write code that would generate new types for example generating Matrix struct with demensions known at compile-time.

> 

Reviewer: I'd add two more important points (the first being IMHO **enormously** important):

1. Overall safety. There has be numerous discussions about compile-time assert, ahead-of-time proving of correctness of certain properties of passed data to a function etc. Different compile-time warnings, etc. (yes, I'm the sucker who fights e.g. for much increased floating point safety in *V*).

2. Optimization. Proving certain aspects of given data etc. helps a lot with compile-time optimization. Imagine the regex module we have compiling vast majority of expressions in compile-time to highly efficient bytecode. Now this has to be done in run time without any good way to check for correctness of the regex syntax itself as well as without any opportunity of optimization of register spilling, caching etc.

I've actually discussed the above two points in different PRs & issues in the last two years. So I'm super excited to support this RFC!

# Compile-time execution

# Summary 

This RFC proposes to entirely change the current implementation of compile-time that will allow to run V language itself at comptime.

# Motivation

 The main purpose to do so is current limitation of compile-time evaluation:
- No way to invoke arbitrary V functions
- No way to choose function at compile time: 
```v
$if flag_a {
    fn foo() {
        println('bar')
    }
} $else {
    fn foo() {
        println('foo')
    }
}
```
^ Compiler cannot handle this code 

- It limits our generics and compile-time reflection. With proper comptime it would be possible to generate complex serialization/deserialization functions without compiler support. 
- Implementing proper comptime in fact would simplify our compiler pipelines, at the moment there is a lot of edge-cases for handling current limited comptime. 
- Proper metaprogramming is must have in every modern language 

# Guide-level explanation 

> With this RFC the main change is that all expressions and statements prefixed with `$` will be treated as compile-time and all of them can be executed *before* codegen. Current compile-time is quite limited and allows only a few statements (`$if`,`$for`) and only specific calls.

Reviewer 2: Imho a distinct keyword like `comptime`, will be clearer than a sigil prefix like `$`, because it will be easier to read/skim without overlooking it, and to search for too, especially given that `$` is used (currently) in string interpolation.

Reviewer 2: A separate keyword, will also make the transition period easier, since V could support the older `$if, $for` constructs too for a while, till `comptime` stabilizes.

Author: Yeah this is a good idea, I'll update RFC and will also add better explanation to examples this evening or tomorrow :D

You can compare new way of handling comtime to Zig comptime functionality. It would allow us not only to perform some computations at compile-time but also generate new structures and functions at compile-time. All generic types would not be just some compiler magic but `v.ast.Type` and you should be able to invoke all of its methods at compile-time, get type symbol from it and even create new `v.ast.Type`s at compile-time.  

First where comptime can be used is automatic generation of serialization/deserialization functions. Here's small example of how we can implement automatic `str()` for types: 
```v
fn to_str<T>(val T) string {

>     // FIXME: Decide if generic type is `v.ast.Type` or `v.ast.TypeSymbol`

Reviewer: From my very limited knowledge of *V* compiler `TypeSymbol` should be closer.

Reviewer 3: The type is v.ast.Type which you can resolve to TypeSymbol that contains the information of the Type.

Author: @danieldaeschle I think setting generic comptime variable types to `v.ast.TypeSymbol` would be better and would make usage simpler, otherwise we have to provide some builtin functions or special syntax to access TypeSymbol information and I think it is not the best option

        return int_string(val)
    } else if T.kind == .array {
        mut out := '['
        for i,elem in val {
            out = '${out}${elem}'
            if i != val.len - 1 {
                out = '${out},'
            }
        }
        return '${out}]'
    } else if T.kind == .struct_ {
        out = '${$T.name} {'
        $for field in T.fields {
            field := val.$field 
            out = '${out} ${$field}: ${field}'
        }
        return '${out}}'
    } else {
        // and so on...
    }
}
```

Notice that we do not have `$else` anymore, that is because with this proposal if parser sees `$` it simply continues parsing V statements or expressions *but* parsed statement and expression will be marked with `comptime` flag.

And here is simple example of factorial that is executed fully at compile-time! 
```v
fn factorial(x int) int {
    if x < 2 {
        return x 
    } 

    return factorial(x - 1) * x
}

fn main() {
    cx := $factorial(5) // call prefixed with `$` becomes compile-time call
    $cy := factorial(6) // variable assignment prefixed with `$` puts it to compile-time environment 
    println(cx) // 120 
    println($cy) // 720
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: This needs more detailed explanation, about what will be produced at each stage: what will be printed, and *when* it will be printed.

```v
gen.eval.add_func('include', fn (gen cgen.Gen, args []Value) {
    gen.includes.write_string(args[0].str())
})

// used like this in toplevel:
$include("header.h")
```

# Drawbacks 
This would break a lot of code that depends on current implementation of compile-time and it would take quite a lot of time to switch to new comptime and implement it. 

# Rationale and alternatives 

This design allows to execute entire V language at comptime and it makes it possible to:
- Implement serializers/deserializers
- Write code that would produce new code a-la Lisp macros 
- Write code that would generate new types for example generating Matrix struct with demensions known at compile-time.
*Changes suggested by dumblob*
- Overall improvement of safey: compile-time assertions, ahead-of-time proving of correctness of certains properties of passed data to a function etc.
- Optimization. Proving certain aspects of given data etc. For example regex module that compiles regular expressions to bytecode at compile-time instead of wasting time at runtime.

> If we would not implement proper compotime until `1.0` we probably would never manage to do so after `1.0` release. Rust for example still does not have full `const fn` support in stable release. Also if we would not implement this it would limit our compile-time reflection by a lot. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we would not implement proper comptime until `1.0`, we probably would never manage to do so after the `1.0` release. Rust for example still does not have full `const fn` support in stable release. Also if we would not implement this, it would limit our compile-time reflection by a lot. 
```

# Compile-time execution

# Summary 

This RFC proposes to entirely change the current implementation of compile-time that will allow to run V language itself at comptime.

# Motivation

 The main purpose to do so is current limitation of compile-time evaluation:
- No way to invoke arbitrary V functions
- No way to choose function at compile time: 
```v
$if flag_a {
    fn foo() {
        println('bar')
    }
} $else {
    fn foo() {
        println('foo')
    }
}
```
^ Compiler cannot handle this code 

- It limits our generics and compile-time reflection. With proper comptime it would be possible to generate complex serialization/deserialization functions without compiler support. 
- Implementing proper comptime in fact would simplify our compiler pipelines, at the moment there is a lot of edge-cases for handling current limited comptime. 
- Proper metaprogramming is must have in every modern language 

# Guide-level explanation 

> With this RFC the main change is that all expressions and statements prefixed with `comptime` will be treated as compile-time and all of them can be executed *before* codegen. Current compile-time is quite limited and allows only a few statements (`$if`,`$for`) and only specific calls.

Reviewer 3: Should we really change $ to comptime?

Author: No, this is about introducing `comptime` keyword so code using `$`-based comptime code does not break

Reviewer: Hm, this would mean a really hard violation of the *there is only one way of doing a thing* principle. Why would you want to keep `$if` next to `comptime if` etc.?

Not speaking about funny things like `comptime $if`. Is it a double evaluation `eval1` followed by a second `eval1`? Or is it some special evaluation trick? Or why does the syntax even allow this?

Reviewer 3: I think they co-exist some time but $if will be removed then.

Author: > I think they co-exist some time but $if will be removed then.

@dumblob this ^. Also we can emit error or warning when `$` is used in CTE context

Reviewer 4: Sorry for the delay. I'm fine with this RFC, but I don't think we should replace `$` with `comptime`.

I'd keep `$`.

Author: > Sorry for the delay. I'm fine with this RFC, but I don't think we should replace `$` with `comptime`.
> 
> I'd keep `$`.

The point of adding `comptime` is to not break compiler while CTE is implemented so they would exist at the same time for some time and once comp time is stable enough just drop `comptime`

Reviewer 4: Then it's totally fine :)

- Implement serializers/deserializers
- Write code that would produce new code a-la Lisp macros 

> - Write code that would generate new types for example generating Matrix struct with demensions known at compile-time.

Reviewer 2: `dimensions`
